Here again is our simple two-linked planar robot and what we're going to do now is to
consider the end effector velocity as a function
of a very specific set of joint velocities.
That's the set of joint velocities that have
got a magnitude of 1. We can think about this
geometrically. What we're interested in is
the set of all velocities that lie on this
red circle. Here is a general point Q that
lies on that circle. Points here and here
corresponds to motion of joint 1 only and
points here and here corresponds to motion
of joint 2 only. All the other points in the
circle correspond to a mixture of motion of
joint 1 and of joint 2.
Another way we could write this constraint
that the velocity lies on the red circle is
in terms of this vector, vector product. It's
the same as the dot product. Same dot product
of Qdot with itself is equal to 1. We have
an expression for Qdot in terms of the Jacobian
matrix inverse and the velocity of the robot
end effector. So I can substitute this expression
for Qdot into the above and I get a complex
expression that looks like this.
What does that mean? Well this is the equation
for an ellipse. It's an ellipse in the velocity
space. So in the coordinate system xdot and
ydot, what we have here is an expression for
an ellipse. So this is a particular velocity
on that ellipse xdot and ydot. What happened
is we've mapped a set of velocities in the
joint space which was a circle into a set
of velocities in the end effector velocity
space and that is an ellipse. What this says
is that the robot was able to achieve quite
a high speed in the y direction but a relatively
low speed in the x direction. So it can go fast in the y direction and more slowly in the x direction.
Now this ellipse that I've drawn is a function
of the joint angle configuration. The shape
of the ellipse depends on the way the robot
joint angles are configured.
Let's have a look at the example to get the intuition behind this. Once again, this is our two-linked robot.
And if I moved joint 1 then the end of link
1 will move with the velocity like this. And
if I move joint 2 then the end of link 2 will
move with the velocity like this. The end
effector velocity is the vector sum of these
two velocities. We can add the two vectors
together and this is the resultant.
And what we see in this particular configuration,
the robot was able to move more quickly in
the vertical direction than it can do in the
horizontal direction. So for equal joint velocities,
we will in general get an even velocity in
the different Cartesian directions. This depends
on the robot's configuration.
Let's have a look at how the robot's velocity
ellipse changes shape as the robot's configuration
changes. I've imported a model of the two-linked
planar manipulator. I plotted and I created
a teach window here. So we can see the blue
panel on the side has got a couple of sliders
that allow me to change the joint angles of
the robot. This is a plain view. A top down
view of the robot manipulator.
First thing I'm going to do is to adjust the
joint 1 slide a little bit. Here we can see
the robot's velocity ellipse. It's very, very
skinny indeed. That's because the robot is
at a near singular condition. We see that
in configuration like this, the robot is able
to move quite quickly towards the left and
the right. But it's almost completely unable
to move either upwards or downwards. The configuration here is close to singularity and similarity
came about when the second joint angle was
very close to 0. Let me increase the second
joint angle. What's going to happen now is
that the ellipse gets wider and wider.
The robot is further away from singularity and
is now in a configuration of joint angles
that allows it to move quite readily along
the direction of link 2 or orthogonal to link
2. Now if I reduce the second joint angle,
Q2, make it close to 0, we see that the ellipse
is going to get skinnier and skinnier. Ultimately
it will become an ellipse of 0 with a straight line.